 

Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services

P.O. Box 570. Jefferson City. MO 65102-0570 Phone: 573-751-6400 FAX: 573-751-6010
RELAY MISSOURI for Hearin and S eech Impaired 1-800-735-2966 VOICE 1-800-735-2466

Peter Lyskowski Jeremiah W. (Jay) Nixon
Acting Director Governor

 

 

Missouri Public Water Systems

November 10, 2015

Dear Public Water System Owners/Operators:

The Missouri State Public Health Laboratory (MSPHL) is in the process of implementing a new
Laboratory Information Management System (LIMS) in its drinking water bacteriology testing
laboratory. The OpenELIS (OE) LIMS will provide the laboratory with improved sample management
capability, improved data integrity and reduced potential for human data entry error. In addition, the
system will provide improved reporting capabilities, including direct electronic data exchange with the
Missouri Department ofNatural Resources’ (MDNR) Safe Drinking Water Information System
(SDWIS). SDWIS is the computer system MDNR uses to store regulatory water testing data and report
testing results to you and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. In addition, the new OE LIMS will
provide a web portal that MSPI-IL clients can use to access their own test results in real time.

As the MSPHL implements this new computer system, several changes will be made in the way you

collect and submit water samples for testing. This letter and information packet will provide you with
information to help educate you on these changes.

NEW SAMPLE BOTTLES:

Beginning in August 2015, the MSPHL began using a larger sample bottle for water bacterial testing.

This bottle has a shrink wrap seal and two lines to indicate the proper sample volume. Please read the
attached “SAMPLE COLLECTION INSTRUCTIONS” for details on how to use these new bottles.

Sample volume MUST be within the two lines on the bottle (100 - 120 mL) to be acceptable for

testing. You may continue to use your old bottles until the MSPHL can ship you new ones. Once you
have received the new bottles, please discard or recycle the old bottles.

NEW SAMPLE INFORMATION FORMS:
The traditional sample information “card” that has been used for more than twenty years is being

replaced by the Environmental Sample Collection Form. An example form is attached. Please read the
attached instructions for information on properly completing the new form.

Changes to the form include the following:

1. Form size is expanded to a single 8 '/2” x 1 1” sheet of paper. The form is no longer in a triplicate
carbon copy format. You may choose to photocopy for your records if you prefer. Note: MDNR

does not require a public water system to retain copies of sample collection forms; however, you
might utilize them for system inspections.

2. The form is printed by the OE LIMS and will be pre-populated with your Public Water Supply
ID number, PWS name, address and county. Forms should not be shared with other supplies.

www.hea|th.mo.gov

Healthy Missourians for life.
The Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services will be the leader in promoting. protecting and partnering for health.

AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY /AFFIRMATIVE ACTION EMPLOYER: Services provided on a nondiscriminatory basis.

Contract operators will be provided with forms for all the supplies they operate. Blank forms will
be available for MDNR Regional Ofﬁce staff use.

3. The form requires all requested information to be printed by the collector. There are no longer
check boxes for Sample Type or Repeat Location.

4. Facility ID, Sample Collection Point ID and Location for the sampling site MUST be
provided by the collector. This information is available from your MDNR approved PWS
sampling plan. MDNR will be providing all public water systems with a current copy of their
approved sampling plan. This information is required by SDWIS and is used by MDNR to
ensure regulatory compliance requirements have been met. Failure to complete this information
on the sample collection form may result in a non-compliance report from MDNR.

5. A Collector Signature line has been added. The sample collector must sign the form to attest the
information provided is accurate to the best of their knowledge.

The MSPHL will begin shipping the new forms to public water systems in late November or early

December. Please begin using the new forms December 16, 2015. Discard all the old forms (“cards”)
at that time.

NEW SAMPLE INSTRUCTIONS:

Sample instructions have been revised to include changes to the bottle and sampling form. The
instructions include detailed information on how to collect the sample using the new bottle, how to
complete the new sample collection form, how to best ship samples to the MSPHL using the free

MSPHL courier system, and how to register for the new MSPHL web portal. A copy ofthese
instructions is attached.

NEW WEB PORTAL FOR RESULTS REPORTS

The OE LIMS provides a web portal that may be used by systems to view and print their test result
reports, check status of samples. download sample information into Excel. and receive automated emails
when samples are received at the laboratory, and when sample results are ready to be viewed. For
information on how to gain access to this portal. please contact Shondra Johnson, LIMS Administrator

at Shondra.Johnson(cDhealth.mo.gov or at 573-751-3334.

IMPLEMENTATION DATES:

The MSPHL intends to implement the OpenELIS LIMS on December 1, 2015. There will be a two
week testing period in which laboratory staff will run the new LIMS in conjunction with our current
manual, paper-based system to ensure the OE LIMS is operating properly. You may continue to submit
samples as you currently do. using the old sample information card, throughout this time.

On December 16, 2015, the MSPHL plans to “go-live” with the new OE LIMS. Samples submitted
after that date should be submitted on the new Environmental Sample Collection Form. At that time. the
MSPHL Test Results Web Portal will also be available to those systems that have been granted access.

The MSPHL and MDNR understand that there will be a lot ofchanges to a system that has been in place
for many years. The MSPHL is excited about the added benefits from this new system, and we ask for
your patience as we implement the OpenELlS LIMS at the Missouri State Public Health Laboratory.

If you have any questions, please contact the MSPHL Environmental Bacteriology Unit at 573-751
3334. You may also contact your MDNR Regional Office for additional information on sample
collection.

Once again. thank you for your patience and understanding as we implement these changes.

/Z.2i7»(,a../L$zL,.,.M.N

Patrick R. Shannon
Manager, Environmental Bacteriology Unit

Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services
State Public Health Laboratory

101 North Chestnut St.

P.O. Box 570

Jefferson City, MO 65102

Phone: 573-751-3334

Email: Pat.Shannon(a2health.mo.gov
Web: www.health.mo.gov/Lab

   

Order #: 984 ||[||l|l||ll||l REPORT TO: BILL TO:

Pages in order: 1 of 1 65 llllllllllll 82 llllllllllllll

Containers in Order; 1 ADRIAN MO DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES
16 E ST}! ST 1101 RIVERSIDE DRIVE
ADRIAN, MO 6-1720 JEFFERSON CITY, MO 65102

Re uested Anal sesffests

PUBLIC DRINKING WATER BACTERIAL ANALYSIS
Total Coliform Bacteria and E. coli (Present/Absent Test)

PRINT LEGIBLY. Instructions for completing form are supplied in the Collection Kit. For compliance monitoring questions, contact the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources-Public Drinking Water Branch at (573) 751-5331 or your regional office. For laboratory test
results or testing questions. contact the Missouri State Public Health Laboratory at (573) 751-3334.

Com lete or correct the followin information

Environmental
Sample Collection Form

Collected Date: Collected Time:
PWS Id: MC1010001 Facility ld: DS

Sample Type: I Sample Collection Poigt
Location: 1 Collector:

Collector Phone: Sample Category: Bacterial
Repeat Location: Bottle Number:
Free Chlorine: 1 Total Chlorine:

Collector Signature: I County: BATES

     

Missouri Department of Health & Senior Services

 

2'

5%

§ _
a -5 ‘3
o 3 93
g N § 5 For Laborato Use Onl -- Please do not write below this line
a 5-’ 8» E .
4 :3 E 5- Received By: pH:
_c L‘¢'—u‘ H 2 5 § Evidence of Tampering: Yes No Evidence of Cooling: Yes No
0: 3 _ — _
Z5 .3 O §~§  Date Printed: 2015-11-06 Temperature ( Celsius ):
§ 5 S 2 . :5“ Bottles Received: Thermometer ID:
0. . 5 8 'gzmasé
SSOEEE
(D 1- O. ‘J .C (D

j :"I:/1.'..'f‘.l* ill?   7i.I‘.=ll_7f‘».l

 BUILD ID BUILD ID I  I  till I} .'l.‘T5 I--ll  If

SD 062015

   

SAM PLE COLLECTION INSTRUCTIONS

  
  

J.  MISSOURI
 5‘-.~;~_  DEPARTMENT OF
L::-»L:n:. NATURAL RESOURCES

PUBLIC DRINKING WATER for COLIFORM BACTERIA ANALYSIS

   

This sample kit and collection method is for public drinking water regulatory compliance and special samples.

Only samples collected in bottles supplied by the Missouri State Public Health Laboratory (MSPHL) and collected

in accordance with these instructions will be accepted for testing. PLEASE READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS
COMPLETELY BEFORE COLLECTING SAMPLES.

Sample Containers:
Sample bottles from the MSPI-IL contain a chlorine neutralizer that is present in powder or liquid form. The bottles

are sterile and ready for use when shipped. Do not rinse the contents from the container and keep the bottle
closed until it is to be filled.

Shrink Wrap Seal:

Remove the sea] by pulling down on the red strip
and pcaling shrink wrap from both the cap and
bottle. Discard all shrink wrap. Do not attempt to
reseal lid with shrink wrap still attached.

Two Fill Lines: _ 

Fill the bottle until the water sample level is I “  L
BETWEEN THE TWO LINES. Place the bottle . .

on a level surface to check the sample level.

Samples below the 100 mL (lower) line WILL
NOT BE TESTED due to insufﬁcient sample
volume. Samples above the 120 mL (upper) line
WILL NOT BE TESTED due to overﬁlled
bottle. Technical protocol and EPA requirements
dictate that bottles must have suI'I'1cient air space
to add testing reagents and to mix the sample

properly.

~ ‘/ <— Max. fill line

6- Min. fill line

If the bottle is overﬁlled past the 120 mL line, For More Information’ phase Contact

pour off water until the sample volume is between

the two lines before shipping to MSPHL. MSPHL
WILL NOT adjust sample volume once the
sample is received at the lab.

Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services
State Public Health Laboratory

Environmental Bacteriology Unit

101 North Chestnut St., P.O. Box 570

Jefferson City, MO 65102

. Phone: 573-751-3334
There IS no longer a label to record sample FAX 573_522_4032
information on the bottle. DO NOT WRITE ON Emai}: lab“/Cb] @hea”h.mO. syov
THE BOTTLE. Please complete a sample ""“"‘—“—“I““

information form for each sample submitted for
testing. DATE AND TIME OF SAMPLE
COLLECTION and the BOTTLE NUMBER
(from sticker on bottle) ARE REQUIRED. A form
for each bottle is included in this sample kit.

No Paper Label:

Website: www.heaIth.mo.gov/ Lab

Page 1 of 4 LAB 34 Public Water (R10-2015)

 

Bottle is clean and sterile.
ready for sample
(Remove and discard plastic seal)

 
   

Max Fill Line
Min Full Line

 

Bacteriological Sample Collection Procedures

Assemble all of the sampling supplies. Before you begin, wash your hands

thoroughly before handling supplies. Go to the sampling location(s) speciﬁed
in your Missouri Department of Natural Resources (MDNR) approved
sampling site plan. The sample should be taken from a clean. smooth-nosed cold
water faucet if possible. Avoid drinking fountains, leaky faucets, hot/cold
mixing faucets and f rost-proof yard hydrants since it is not practical to
sterilize these ﬁxtures. If possible, remove any aerators, strainers or hoses
that are present because they may harbor bacteria. Follow the procedures below
when collecting the sample. Instructions for completing the environmental
sampling form are on the following page.

l.

2

Page 2 of 4

. Flame-sterilize the tap and/or chemically disinfect the tap. Do not flame
. Flush the tap for an additional 3 minutes with cold water, and then reduce

. Remove the plastic shrink wrap seal by pulling down on the red strip and

 

Open the cold water tap for about 3 minutes before collecting the sample.
This should adequately ﬂush the water line of any debris. F...,,,,,,,,c,,0,,,c,,,,,,,Wm,W. ,,
between the two lines on the bottle

sterilize if tap is plastic or if aerators are attached. Disinfect tap by
thoroughly rinsing both the inside and outside ofthe tap with a mixture of 50%

house-hold bleach (NaOCl) and 50% tap water. Take extreme care with strong
bleach (oxidizing) solutions.

to a gentle flow to about the width of a pencil. Do not change the water flow
once you have started sampling as this could dislodge contaminants in the tap.

 

pealing the shrink wrap from both the cap and bottle. Discard the shrink
wrap. Do not attempt to reseal the lid with shrink wrap still attached.

. Grasp cap along top edge and remove carefully. Do not touch the inside

with your fingers. Hold the bottle in one hand and the cap in the other. Do not

lay the cap down or put it in a pocket! Also, take care not to contaminate the

sterile bottle or cap with your ﬁngers or permit the faucet to touch the inside of
the bottle.

rnosr-moor nvonurr

. Hold the bottle so that water entering the bottle will not come in contact with

your hands or the outside of the bottle.

. Fill the bottle until the water sample level is BETWEEN THE TWO

LINES on the bottle (100 — 120 ml). Preferably, the sample level should be at
or just slightly above the 100 ml line. Sample levels below the 100 ml (lower)
line WILL NOT BE TESTED due to insufficient sample volume. Sample

levels above the 120 ml (upper) line WILL NOT BE TESTED due to
overfilled bottle. If the bottle is overfilled, you may pour off any excess water

to get the sample level between the two lines. Place the cap on the bottle and
screw it down tightly.

3
Do NOT use.

HOT-COLD HIXING FAUCE1‘

. Fill out the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services (DHSS)

State Public Health Lab (SPHL) Environmental Sample Collection Form
using waterproof ink. See attached document for instructions on properly
completing the sample collection form and for shipping instructions.

DONOTUSE.

. For single samples, neatly fold the sample collection form into thirds (standard

letter fold). roll around the bottle and place in the shipping box. For multiple
samples. fold the forms once or more as needed, and place in the shipping box
alongside the samples. lfneeded, use bubble pack or folded paper to fill space.

Do not use shredded paper. Seal the box with a single strip of shipping tape and
affix the return address label to the top ofthe box.

LAB 34 Public Water (R10-2015)

INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING ENVIRONMENTAL SAMPLE COLLECTION FORM
Public Drinking Water Bacterial Analysis

PRINT LEGIBLY using water proofink. A standard ink pen is sufficient. Complete ALL sample information lines on the form.
Some sections ofthe form may already be completed by the laboratory computer system when the forms are printed. To make

corrections, please draw a single line through the inaccurate information and print the corrected information behind it. The
sections of the form and directions for completing each line are as follows:

Order #: For Missouri State Public Health Lab (MSPHL) purposes only. Pages in Order and Containers in Order indicate number of
forms and sample bottles shipped in the sample kit order.

REPORT TO: Public water system’s name and shipping address on ﬁle with Missouri Department ofNatural Resources (MDNR).
Please review and correct if necessary. Result reports will be mailed to this address.

BILL T0: Section defaulted to the MDNR. There are no charges for public water testing at the MSPIIL.

Reguested Analvsis/Tests:
This section will state PUBLIC DRINKING WATER BACTERIAL ANALYSIS. If it does not, you may have the wrong collection

form. Please contact the MSPHL or MDNR for the proper form. Do not use forms from a local county health agency as those forms are
for private well water samples. Your MDNR Regional Of ﬁce can provide blank forms for your use.

Complete or correct the following information:

All lines are considered required information. Failure to complete a line may result in an invalid sample.

Collected Date: Enter the date of sample collection in the format YYYY-MM-DD. Use 4 digits for year and 2 digits for month and date.
November I, 20l5 would be written as 20I5-I I-OI.

Collected Time: Enter the time of sample collection using 24-hour military format hhrmm.

PWS ID: Ifblank, enter your 7-digit Public Water System ID number as assigned by MDNR (MO#######).

Facility ID: Defaulted to DS (Distribution System) for routine samples. lfsubmitting a sample type other than Routine, enter the Facility

ID number from your system’s MDNR approved sample site plan (for example DS#, WL#, WT#).
Sample Type: Enter one ofthe following options:

Routine — Regular monthly monitoring samples.

Repeat — A series of 3 or 4 repeat samples (4 if you only take I routine per month) must be taken for each routine sample that tests
positive (Present) for coliform bacteria. All repeats must be taken on the same day, within 24 hours of being notified of the
coliform positive sample. Site locations are based on the approved site sampling plan. Typically these samples will consist ofone
from the site of the original unsafe sample location. one within 5 service connections upstream, one within 5 service connections
downstream, and one from a location specified or approved by MDNR. If your system is a ground water system serving less than

1,000 people without 4 log virus inactivation, one repeat sample (the fourth repeat) may be collected from the source/well prior to
treatment. See Repeat Location below.

Replacement — All samples which are not tested because they were invalid, incomplete information, outdated, broken in transit,
frozen, etc., must be replaced with a single sample from the same location within 24 hours of being notiﬁed.
Source/Well — If your system is a ground water system without chlorine contact time (4 log virus inactivation or removal), one
sample must be collected from each well/source, prior to any treatment. active at the time of the positive sample(s).
Special — Any sample that does not count for compliance. These may include samples to check disinfection practices on repairs or
new construction or for seasonal public water systems prior to serving water to the public.
Sample Collection Point ID: Enter the sampling point ID number from your system’s MDNR approved sample site plan. This number is
required. DO NOT LEAVE BLANK. If you have questions about your Sample Collection Point ID, please contact the MDNR.
Location: Enter the address or name of the collection location associated with the Sample Collection Point ID above. (Important Note:
The Location is tied to the Sample Collection Point ID from the approved site sampling plan and will be the location printed on

the ﬁnal analysis report. If the location entered on the collection form does not match the ﬁnal report, contact MDNR.)
Collector: Enter your last name, first name.

Collector Phone: Enter your I0-digit day time phone number.
Sample Category: This will always be Bacterial and is already filled out for you.

Repeat Location: If the sample type above is Repeat, enter the repeat location for this sample: upstream, downstream, original, source or
other. If other, please describe the location.

Bottle Number: Enter the number from the label on the bottle. This is used to match collection forms to samples.

Free Chlorine: Enter the free chlorine test level in mg/L (if your system is chlorinated).

Total Chlorine: Enter the total chlorine test level in mg/L (ifyour system is chlorinated).

Collector Signature: By signing you attest that the information provided is accurate to the best ofyour knowledge.

County: Enter the county name for the collection point ifit is not already filled out for you.

All other sections ofthe Environmental Sample Collection Form are for MSPHL use only. Ifyou have any questions, please Contact the
MSPHL Environmental Bacteriology Unit at (573) 751-3334 or your local MDNR Regional Office (see next page for phone numbers).

Page 3 of 4 LAB 34 Public Water (R10-2015)

Shipping Instructions

Per U.S. Environmental Protection Agency requirements, public water samples must be received by the laboratory and tested

within 30 hours of the date and time of collection. The MSPHL and MDNR recommend you use the free Department of Health
and Senior Services (DHSS) contract courier for overnight delivery to the MSPH L. This courier picks up at most local public health

agency of lices and hospitals (Note: Not all hospitals will accept water samples for courier pick up). For sample drop off locations and

times, please go to http://www.health.mo.gov/lab/courierservices.php and click on the interactive map or the listing of drop off locations

by county; or you may call the MSPHL courier liaison at (573) 751-4830, or the MDNR Public Drinking Water Branch (PDWB) at (573)
526-l I24.

Please note the courier is allowed to pick up samples within one hour ofthe scheduled time (before or after). The earliest pick up

time is at 10:30 a.m. To ensure your samples meet the transit time requirement of 30 hours, it is important that you collect your samples in
the morning and have them dropped off at the courier pickup point one hour prior to the scheduled time.

Use of the U.S. Postal Service or other commercial carriers such as Fed Ex or UPS will require additional charges and may not meet the
30 hour transit time requirement.

Samples should not be en route to the laboratory over a weekend or state holiday (New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King Day,

Lincoln’s Birthday, Washington’s Birthday, Truman’s Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day. Vetemn’s
Day. Thanksgiving Day. and Christmas.)

Public water supplies may use the new MSPHL Test Results Web Portal to retrieve preliminary test results on-line. For information on
how to register as a user for the web portal and to receive email notiﬁcations, please contact the MSPHL LlMS Administrator at
shondra.iohnson@health.mo.gov or call 573-751-3334. These preliminary test results are for informational purposes only. Official test

results are available on-line within 2 or 3 business days at the MDNR Drinking Water Watch website http://dnr.mo.gov/DWW/.
In addition, the official bacteriological sample reports will be mailed by MDNR within 4 or 5 business days.

Additional sample bottles can be ordered on-line at http://www.health.mo.gov/lab/specimentestformsphp or by calling the MSPHL
Central Services Unit at (573) 751-4830.

Sometimes in spite oftaking all ofthe precautions you may get a call from MDNR or results by mail notifying you that coliform or
E. coli bacteria are present in your water. You will be given specific instructions that may include collection of repeat samples to confirm

that the first routine sample was not a sampling error. Please call the MDNR Regional Office staff and they will discuss the procedure
with you. See contact information below.

For more information about public water systems, contact the MDNR Public Drinking Water Branch at (573) 75 l-533l or your MDNR
Regional Office (counties within each region are listed at http://dnr.mo.gov/regions/index.html) or visit www.dnr.mo.gov/env/wpp/dw
index.htm|:

Missouri Department of Natural Resources
Division of linviromnental Quality
Water Protection Program
Public Drinking Water Branch
l’.(). Box 176
Jefferson City. l\/lissouri 65102
573-751-533l

Kansas City Regional Office Northeast Regional Office Southeast Regional Office
Department of Natural Resources Department ofNatural Resources Department of Natural Resources
500 NE Colbem Road 170‘) Prospect Drive 2l55 North Westwood Blvd.
l.ce‘s Summit. MO 6«l086—47l0 Macon. MO 63552-I930 Poplar Bluff, MO 63901-I420
(8|6) 25|-0700 (660) 385-6000 (573) 840-9750
Southwest Regional Office St. Louis Regional Office
Department ofNatural Resources Department of Natural Resources
2040 West Woodland 7545 South Lindbergh. Suite 2l()
Springfield. MO 65807-59l2 St. Louis. MO 63 I25
(4 I 7) 891-4300 (314) 4|6-29()()

Page 4 of 4 LAB 34 Public Water (R10-2015)

